README.md, before:

# xlsform-converter (xlsconv)

xlsform-converter converts surveys defined via the [XLSForm standard] into [Django models] and HTML5 [Mustache templates].  This makes it possible to re-use the powerful form building tools provided by the [Open Data Kit ecosystem][ecosystem], while leveraging Django's robust support for relational databases like [PostgreSQL].

xlsform-converter is designed to facilitate the rapid development of offline-capable data collection apps via the [wq framework].  The ultimate goal is to provide full compatibility with the form authoring tools provided by [ODK (and Enketo, etc.)][ecosystem].  Note that this is not the same as full XForm compatibility: the client and server components of wq ([wq.app] and [wq.db]) use a JSON-based [REST API] to exchange data and are not directly compatible with their ODK Analogues (ODK Collect and ODK Aggregate, respectively).

For the database itself, the key distinction from other XLSForm tools (including some powered by Django) is that xlsform-converter converts the xlsform fields directly into a Django model definition, rather than representing the entire XForm standard within Django.  This means that each row in an XLSForm "survey" tab is mapped to (usually) a single column in a simple relational database table.  Repeat questions are handled by creating a second model with a `ForeignKey` to the parent survey model.

xlsform-converter also supports a couple of additional "constraints" that are not part of the XLSForm standard:

 * `wq:ForeignKey('app.ModelName')`: Create a foreign key to an existing Django model (presumably not defined in the spreadsheet).  This is effectively a more relational version of `select_one_external`.
 * `wq:initial(3)`: Very similar to `repeat_count`, but only set for new records.
 * `wq:length(5)`: Text field maximum length (similar to a `string-length` constraint)

[![Latest PyPI Release](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/xlsconv.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlsconv)
[![Release Notes](https://img.shields.io/github/release/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/xlsconv.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![GitHub Stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/stargazers)
[![GitHub Forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/network)
[![GitHub Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/issues)

[![Travis Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/wq/xlsform-converter/master.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/wq/xlsform-converter)
[![Python Support](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/xlsconv.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlsconv)

### Usage

```bash
pip3 install xlsconv

# Use the default models.py template
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls > myapp/models.py

# Use the rest.py template (or admin.py, or serializers.py)
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls rest > myapp/models.py

# Use a custom template
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls my_templates/models.py > myapp/models.py

# Use the default edit.html template
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls > templates/survey_edit.html

# Use the list.html template (or detail.html, or popup.html)
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls list > templates/survey_list.html

# Use a custom template
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls my_templates/edit.html > templates/survey_edit.html
```

If you are using wq, you may be interested in [wq.start], which uses xlsconv internally for the `wq addform` and `wq maketemplates` commands.

[XLSForm standard]: http://xlsform.org/
[Django models]: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.9/topics/db/models/
[Mustache templates]: https://wq.io/docs/templates
[ecosystem]: https://enketo.org/openrosa
[PostgreSQL]: http://www.postgresql.org/
[wq framework]: https://wq.io/
[wq.app]: https://wq.io/wq.app
[wq.db]: https://wq.io/wq.db
[REST API]: https://wq.io/docs/url-structure
[wq.start]: https://github.com/wq/wq-django-template

Commit message:

list included templates [skip ci]

README.md, after:

# xlsform-converter (xlsconv)

xlsform-converter converts surveys defined via the [XLSForm standard] into [Django models] and HTML5 [Mustache templates].  This makes it possible to re-use the powerful form building tools provided by the [Open Data Kit ecosystem][ecosystem], while leveraging Django's robust support for relational databases like [PostgreSQL].

xlsform-converter is designed to facilitate the rapid development of offline-capable data collection apps via the [wq framework].  The ultimate goal is to provide full compatibility with the form authoring tools provided by [ODK (and Enketo, etc.)][ecosystem].  Note that this is not the same as full XForm compatibility: the client and server components of wq ([wq.app] and [wq.db]) use a JSON-based [REST API] to exchange data and are not directly compatible with their ODK Analogues (ODK Collect and ODK Aggregate, respectively).

For the database itself, the key distinction from other XLSForm tools (including some powered by Django) is that xlsform-converter converts the xlsform fields directly into a Django model definition, rather than representing the entire XForm standard within Django.  This means that each row in an XLSForm "survey" tab is mapped to (usually) a single column in a simple relational database table.  Repeat questions are handled by creating a second model with a `ForeignKey` to the parent survey model.

xlsform-converter also supports a couple of additional "constraints" that are not part of the XLSForm standard:

 * `wq:ForeignKey('app.ModelName')`: Create a foreign key to an existing Django model (presumably not defined in the spreadsheet).  This is effectively a more relational version of `select_one_external`.
 * `wq:initial(3)`: Very similar to `repeat_count`, but only set for new records.
 * `wq:length(5)`: Text field maximum length (similar to a `string-length` constraint)

[![Latest PyPI Release](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/xlsconv.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlsconv)
[![Release Notes](https://img.shields.io/github/release/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/xlsconv.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![GitHub Stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/stargazers)
[![GitHub Forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/network)
[![GitHub Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/wq/xlsform-converter.svg)](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/issues)

[![Travis Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/wq/xlsform-converter/master.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/wq/xlsform-converter)
[![Python Support](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/xlsconv.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlsconv)

### Included Templates

xlsform-converter uses the following templates to generate Django/wq project files from a given XLSForm.

#### Django App Templates
   - [`models.py`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/models.py-tpl)
   - [`rest.py`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/rest.py-tpl) (for use with [`wq.db.rest`](https://wq.io/docs/about-rest))
   - [`admin.py`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/admin.py-tpl) (for use with [`django.contrib.admin`](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.10/ref/contrib/admin/))
   - [`serializers.py`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/serializers.py-tpl) (for use with `wq.db.rest`)

#### Mustache Templates (for use with [wq](https://wq.io/docs/templates))
   - [`edit.html`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/edit.html)
   - [`detail.html`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/detail.html)
   - [`list.html`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/list.html)
   - [`popup.html`](https://github.com/wq/xlsform-converter/blob/master/xlsconv/templates/popup.html) (for use with [wq/map.js](https://wq.io/docs/map-js))

### Usage

If you are using wq, you may be interested in [wq.start], which uses xlsconv internally for the `wq addform` and `wq maketemplates` commands.  Otherwise, you can use xlsconv directly with the following command-line API:

```bash
pip3 install xlsconv

# Use the default models.py template
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls > myapp/models.py

# Use the rest.py template (or admin.py, or serializers.py)
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls rest > myapp/models.py

# Use a custom template
xls2django my-odk-survey.xls my_templates/models.py > myapp/models.py

# Use the default edit.html template
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls > templates/survey_edit.html

# Use the list.html template (or detail.html, or popup.html)
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls list > templates/survey_list.html

# Use a custom template
xls2html my-odk-survey.xls my_templates/edit.html > templates/survey_edit.html
```

[XLSForm standard]: http://xlsform.org/
[Django models]: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.9/topics/db/models/
[Mustache templates]: https://wq.io/docs/templates
[ecosystem]: https://enketo.org/openrosa
[PostgreSQL]: http://www.postgresql.org/
[wq framework]: https://wq.io/
[wq.app]: https://wq.io/wq.app
[wq.db]: https://wq.io/wq.db
[REST API]: https://wq.io/docs/url-structure
[wq.start]: https://github.com/wq/wq-django-template
